So, here it is. The biggest review of
Axis foils I have ever done. In
chronological order, we've got the
original PGs. Then, we've got the Arts,
then the Spitfires, then the Art Pros,
then the Arc V2s, then the Fireballs.
Lot to say about those, then the PNG
V2s, and finally for the moment, we've
got the Tempos with the new titanium
link fuselage.
So, I hope you've got yourself a coffee
and you're settled because this is going
to be a long one.
>> But hold on a minute. What about all the
missing foils? I haven't included
certain ranges like the original surf
foils, the original high aspect range,
the BSC, the HPS, the SES. Now, all of
those foils are still very, very usable.
They still do exactly what they were
supposed to do when they were first
designed. But in foiling, progress
happens very, very quickly. And nearly
all of those have either been superseded
um or better designs for specific
conditions have been made. If you still
own any of those older foils, don't
panic. Don't get FOMO. They're still
perfectly good. But if you feel like you
need to progress with your foiling or
there are conditions that you just feel
the foils that you've got at the moment
aren't dealing with very well, then
listen on because some of these new
foils may well be right for you. Okay,
I'm going to start off with the PNG
range. On my right, we've got the
original PNG. Um, I had the whole range,
literally every single size from the 850
all the way up to the 1310. Um, now I've
got the full range of the PNG V2s, but
um, that only includes 1200, 1300, and
1400. So, missing here, the 850, uh, the
910, and the 1010. Absolutely amazing
foils. I love them to bits. They were so
easy to use. Um, loads of lift. Um,
really easy to pump. They maneuvered
pretty well really for foils of their
time. Um, they were slow. They were
slow. The 910 was I think one of my
favorite surf foils. The conditions that
were in um at the time uh just suited it
perfectly. Very occasionally the 850,
but really I didn't have uh waves that
were powerful or consistent enough for
that. Um the 1010 on those micro days
was amazing. And the 1010 was a foil
that I really used um a lot for uh sort
of messing around in just the most
inconsistent and smallest wind swell. Um
just to sort of learn to pump and link
waves or or to learn to downwind
connecting those bumps that are forever
changing. Um and it's such a good foil
for that as is the 1150 on the days that
were even smaller. Um, and for a big
pump foil, and that's what it's designed
for, um, it actually, you know, it it it
performed quite well for those
conditions. Certainly for my level, um,
of experience at the time. Now, let's
get down into these sizes, though,
because these sizes are designed
specifically for their pumping
performance. PNG stands for pump and
glide. So, the 1150 was the original
pump foil. Access hit this on the head
so early when other brands didn't even
have pump foiling on their radar. Adrian
designed this foil and he smashed it out
the park and for ages I mean such a long
time it was the benchmark for dock
starting um for flatwater pumping. I
mean its use case was pretty big really
for lightweight winging and uh and
riding tiny little bumps with a suck
maybe prone but bit lifty for prone
foiling. Um
then along came the PNG 1300's. Now if
you have a look at the
design the shape of the 1150
and nearly all of the other PGs are very
similar. the 850, the 950, the 1010, the
1150. 1310's got a little different, a
few little differences, but it follows
the same theme, whereas the original PNG
1300 was much more high aspect. Um, it
was much more glidy and it was faster to
pump. Didn't have quite such aggressive
lift, but it still had very good lift.
And when I first tried it, I've got to
admit, I didn't really get on with the
PNG 1300 straight away. Certainly not as
a dock start flatwater pump foil. Um, I
loved it for light wind winging because
of its extra glide and speed. Um but
after I saw somebody had cracked the
dock starting um uh aspect of it with uh
with the 1300, I revisited it and it
didn't take me long and soon after that
I realized that I actually much prefer
pumping a slightly faster foil with
better glide um than the slower foils.
So
when the 1310 came out
again, initially I didn't like it really
because it was slower than the 1300. Um
but its use case I found a use case for
it. Its use case was really there is
still
I think I'm right in saying in the axis
range of every single foil they've ever
produced. I don't think there's a foil
with such early lift at low speeds. So,
this foil here, the 1310, if you're a
heavyweight and you want to practice the
flat water sub paddle ups, that's
probably the foil to go for. For dock
starting, I found it had a few little um
a few little issues that I it took me a
while to get used to. So, my normal
jumping off a ladder and it's and
pumping straight away more often than
not would throw me off the foil if I was
slightly off balance. But what I figured
out was that if you jump and land on the
board and then you just pause and let it
glide just for a brief moment and then
once you've got your balance and you're
stable then you start pumping no problem
at all. And it did let me pump for
longer. And it was incredibly easy how
high I could stay on the mast. And if
there was a little micro bump, you could
glide. The glide is insane. It it will
just glide on on anything. It's
ridiculous. Um very very quick to be
overfoiled when the bumps get bigger. Um
and for those super super light wind
wing days, um it just blew me away
because you could get up with next to
nothing. You could still using your
rather than roll. Um you could still do
jibes and tacks and uh pump around
looking for uh for bumps, but
if you carved it too quickly, especially
if you try and come out of a carve too
quickly, it would throw you off very
easily. And I also found it had quite an
aggressive stall point. Um so for
lightwing, most of the time I went back
to the 1300 uh because that was my
style. I I preferred that more glidey
feel and the carves are really nice and
as long as you you do it in a controlled
way, you can carve in and out of of
turns. Um, so that was that.
Okay. Then a long time passed and the
PGs have had a big and very very
impressive facelift. Um,
and a little bit similar to the fact
that the 1300 was the standout in terms
of design and style for the whole of the
original PNG range, the PNG V200 is a
slightly different design um, in terms
of its profile, but also in terms of how
it feels. So, let's just have a look at
them. the PNG uh V200.
Got a nice big cord here, which it does
curve in a little bit, but it's still
got quite wide wing tips. Um it's got a
reasonable level of thickness, but it
does fit. All of these new ones fit onto
the uh the black fuselage. Um this is a
really really good upgrade on the 1150
in my opinion. It does everything that
the 1150 did and still does, but it's a
little bit nicer in maneuverability. And
believe it or not, I think it's actually
a little bit more forgiving um in every
aspect in in dock starting and pumping.
Um now, you're never going to break any
duration records by pumping this because
there are so many huge pump foils out
there, and we'll get to some of the Axis
versions of those in a minute. But this
foil, it really, really does make life
very, very easy. And again, for a
beginner, for somebody who's just after
a relaxing ride, whether it's winging,
whether it's suck foiling, it's a really
fun um foil to to mess around in in
small waves. Um it pumps like a dream.
It's easy to recover from mistakes. It's
very controllable. Um, it's a little bit
on the slow side, but that's what it's
designed for. It's not supposed to be a
super quick foil. Um, I've done some
very light wind downwinders on Lake
Garter and some of the lakes here in the
Netherlands and it's fine for that. It's
absolutely fine. When the swell is
moving fast, then you're going to be
turning off the back of it a lot um
because it's just not fast enough to uh
to to keep gliding on on the same bump.
Okay. Then we get to the 1300 and I'm
just going to hold up the 1200 to see
the difference between the two of them.
That might work a little bit better. I
hope it comes up on the the camera. So
those
um little bit more high aspect ratio.
Let me see this one. The 1200 is aspect
ratio 8 and um this one the aspect ratio
is 10.36.
So, we've got an up in aspect ratio. Um,
I'm not sure the exact thickness, but it
it is a little bit faster. It's uh it
glides very very nicely and it pumps
incredibly well. So, for somebody who's
after a foil that's um I think even
easier to do start than the PNG V200
um and it pumps a little bit faster, you
lose a bit of maneuverability. it it's
more locked in, but you can still turn
it and it doesn't really throw you off
like some of the huge foils if you get
your balance wrong. Um, you do have to
be very not aggressive but decisive and
firm when you're carving it. Um, but it
will carve. So whether you're a heavier
person, because obviously the bigger
foils you go, you could say they're more
suited for for heavier and heavier
people. But I'm 80 kg and the PNG V2300
I would definitely use in very very
small surf or micro bumps. Amazing for
downwinding in bay runs, that sort of
thing. Um for winging again it works
really well as a super light wind wing.
Um if you're again heavier but uh yeah
it's a very very versatile toil. Um,
again, not maneuverable in in the terms
of you can, you know, slash it left,
right, left, right, but it'll carve
lovely one way. Just be very decisive
carving or or coming out of the carve uh
and you'll be fine. Now, PNG V2400,
the big brother of the uh 1300, very
similar aspect ratio, just a little bit
more at 10.99 rather than uh 10.36.
Um, and I think it's just a size up
really from the 1300. I've never found
an easier foil to dock start. This is, I
think, the easiest foil I've ever ever
dock started with. The consistency I get
with this is crazy. It's a solid
platform to to to land on and pump away.
You can stay high on the mast really
easily. It's not effortless, but
compared to other foils, it feels um
like I'm putting in a lot less effort to
pump this than normal. The only caveat I
have really to say about the 1400 is
that it's beginning to for me at my
weight and my skill level, it's
beginning to get to the point where if I
don't have um the correct balance um or
if I don't control it really carefully
coming out of a turn, then it it can
throw me off. So, if you make a mistake,
um it's not particularly forgiving. Um,
but again, if you're a heavier rider, I
think that the extra weight that you
have will help you to control that. Um,
I know a couple of riders who are 100
kilos plus and they're always on the
foil bigger than me and they're having,
you know, the same success doing the
same things. So, I think the lighter you
are, that sort of um that instability if
you're off balance is going to affect
you more if you're lighter and less if
you're heavier. Okay. Now, I want to add
another range of foils into here, at
least two of the biggest ones because
they are relevant to the flatwood
pumping dock starting type uh
discussion. And that is the Art Pro 1401
and 1201. I'll just get Okay, so here we
have them. This is the Art Pro 1201.
It's got an aspect ratio of 11.14.
There we go. And uh let's compare it
first of all to the PNG
V200.
You can see
that that aspect ratio is completely
different and
much much thinner.
So, obviously it's going to be faster.
Um, now I've said earlier that I like a
foil that pumps fast and I love this
one. For ages, this was my favorite foil
to pump because I could really
accelerate with it. Um, once you got it
up to speed, it was pretty easy. um in
terms of being able to pump it for a
certain distance or or time. Um
and then the 1401 came out and I
honestly cuz I was given a um a
pre-production model without the
graphics, I honestly don't know the
aspect ratio, but I'm guessing from the
looks of it, it's scaled up from the
1201. Um, I believe there were a few
little tweaks to the uh to the design um
just to make it better. For example,
let's have another quick look. If you
have a look at the wing tips of the 121,
they're actually quite wide. But if you
have a look at the wing tips in
comparison with the 1401,
um, they come to much less width
at those wing tips. Um, now the 1401
in my opinion
took over from me in terms of the 1310
in terms of the longest that I could
pump for. I could link more waves. I
mean, we're talking on a really, really
small day, really small day, bumps that
you could barely even see.
I could pump and link more of those tiny
little bumps with the 1401 than I could
with the 1310.
It's still unforgiving of imbalances,
but not as much as the 1310. And
it's fairly stiff in terms of
maneuverability. But if you turn slow um
and you're careful with it, then you
know you're never going to be slashing
turns with these huge foils. They are
there to do a certain job. And for me,
that job is to pump and link tiny tiny
little microbumps. Um, and this one took
over from the 1310 in terms of how
incredibly easy it was to do. Um,
bear in mind that they came out before
the Art V2, sorry, the PNG V2s. And now
again I have to admit that the 1400 and
the 1300 V2s PNG V2s have now taken over
from those two art pros. So this is
progression. This is
um I mean there's so many discussions
online where people are complaining at
opposite ends of the spectrum. Some
people are complaining that brands bring
out foil ranges far too quickly far too
often. Um, other people are complaining
that there aren't enough foils out there
for them to choose from and and they
want the next level of performance
quicker and quicker and quicker. Um,
I don't know about the other brands
because I don't speak to the designers.
I'm lucky enough to occasionally have a
chat with Adrian from Axis and I'm
confident in saying that he does not
release foils just for the sake of it.
He has to
He has to recognize there's a there's a
gap in our range. We don't have a foil
that does this. And he won't release it
until it's ready, until it's as good as
he can get it at the time. And then yes,
a year, year and a half, two years
later, things have moved forward so much
that he can then maybe design a much
much better one. Hence the PGs and the
V2s, the arts and the art V2s and so on
and so on. Um, so
I personally think that if you've still
got an Art Pro 121 or a PNG 1310 and
you're still liking it, there's no cause
for any problems whatsoever. But if
you're after a different design
characteristic, a different performance
characteristic, or if you feel that you
have progressed so much that you could
handle the next level of performance,
then those are reasons to to maybe
upgrade. Um, but like I say, if you're
enjoying a foil and it's outdated, as
long as you're enjoying it, who cares? I
know people who are still doing
everything on the PNG 1010 and 910 um,
and they're loving it. So, let's not
worry about FOMO.
Okay, a few more things to say about the
Art Pro range while they're still here.
This is the smallest one that I ever
owned, and I did own the full range from
1401 all the way down to the 951. And I
did a big review video on them at the
time of their release. So, if you want
all the information that I gave then,
um, then please have a look at that
video. But right now, I just want to
mention that the 1401 and the 1201 are
very much a really good balance between
the top end and the bottom end. They've
got a good low end. Um, surprisingly
good actually for a a foil that um that
has got really good glide. When you get
to the 1121
and the smaller sizes, then they
suddenly become much more high-end
orientated.
Um, like I say, the 951 was the smallest
one that I ever used and I could use it
for winging. I loved it for winging. Um,
I think my favorite all round foil was
the 101 and the uh the 1051 was again in
lighter conditions was really really
good. I never used the 1121 that much,
but I think that was more down to the
conditions that I was I was falling in
and um and the foil of choice just it
wasn't suitable for for where I was and
what I was doing. Um but these for
winging I still think are amazing foils.
They really are incredible. Um when they
first came out that 1001 was my favorite
for winging. I would, you know, if there
was any chance that it was um usable
according to the conditions, I would be
on that foil pumping or or, you know,
trying to make it work. It was so good
in terms of speed, maneuverability,
glide was incredible. Um, and I got used
to the the high-end at the time. It it
it didn't really cause me any problems.
Um, but then when the fireballs came
along, that changed my life.
And here they are, at least some of
them. I'm not going to get them all out
now. I do have the the whole range down
to the 880, the smallest one, uh, that I
have now. This is a game changer for me.
The Art Pros were good. They are still
good. But with the fireballs,
um, Adrian introduced this what I call
an under camber. Um, so this sort of
scoop, um, in the bottom side, it scoops
towards the trailing edge in that rear
third or the rear half. Um, and there's
all sorts going on in the the rest of
the design profile, but um, these marks
the beginning of serious user
friendliness, serious performance, and
being able to use smaller and smaller
foils
in terms of area. Now, this is where
there's a big debate. Um mainly it's
Adrian leading the charge saying that we
should not be comparing foils inside in
terms of area. Um he maintains that it's
wingspan that gives us the uh uh the the
more accurate sort of measurement. Um
and I think for a while he was
absolutely right. Now there are so many
so many different um performance
aspects.
Uh how do I describe this?
There's so much going on in the design
now that even wingspan doesn't always
give you a brilliant um estimation of of
a
foil's performance. Um I think you have
to be quite technical and look at a
number of different
um pieces of data like wingspan area,
you know, has it got this camber thing
going on? Um thickness, the uh the
the position on the actual foil where
the uh where the thickest part of the
foil is. It used to be that the foils
came up with a very blunt end and curved
over. um now they're or some of them
anyway are quite thin and they don't get
to the thickest point until about it
used to be a third then halfway um back
in the foil. So there's so many things
going on and we haven't even discussed
you know is it rake curve all these
other things. So let's not worry about
that too much. Let's just I'll try and
describe why I like these fireballs so
much. Their range their range of use.
Um, even though they've got a good such
a good bottom end, they don't feel slow.
Um, they have a very very progressive
lift. So, gentle progressive lift.
Doesn't overfoil. Um, doesn't take you
by surprise. Um, and it's got quite a
gentle stall point as well. So, it's not
like they suddenly drop out on you. Um,
got plenty of warning and uh, yeah, no
nasty surprises. um they just operate in
such a wide range of conditions. So
especially with the art pros and before
that to a certain extent the arts um if
I was downwinding and you get a nice
long downwinder and you have you know
maybe the first half is you know you're
pumping a lot because it's quite small
swell and then the second half ramps up
really big conditions. Um,
with the Art Pros and the Arts, I would
find that you'd be fine in one of those
sections, but not both of them. With the
Fireballs, chances are you'll be fine.
You know, obviously there are limits to
how extreme the range can be, but the
fireballs push the limits with the range
um of any for that I've ever used in
terms of being able to cope with such a
big range of uh um of conditions. Um
now, as you get bigger, the 1350 at the
moment is the biggest foil in the range.
Um there are going to be, as you can
see, there are going to be um bigger
sizes and they will be released soon. Um
but at the moment, the 1350 is the
biggest one. And I can dock start this
from a static position. Just jump onto
the board and pump away. Um and yeah,
you got to put effort into pumping
because it's a fast foil. And remember,
I love pumping fast foils. Um, and with
the Ultra Pro carbon mast, no wobbles,
no flex. Um, I can turn it. Now, if
you're lighter than me or you have the
aluminium mast, then you might find it a
little bit wobbly um because of its
wingspan. Um, but trust me, it is with
the the right mast um and boards. If you
are it's a little bit like the the Art
Pro 1201. If you are confident and you
turn it with, you know, with uh meaning,
you you you don't uh you don't sort of
try and turn it. You turn it. You make a
decision, you go for it, and it will
turn really nicely. Whereas the same
with the 1350, I've been pushing it more
and more and more. Um in small surf
with, like I say, with a really stiff
mass, you you can actually turn it and
surf it. By the time you get down to the
1250, it actually turns really nice. The
1160 and the 1070 and the 1000 are just
all of them are the nicest ones. Like
constantly changing between which is my
favorite out of those three. Um by the
time I get down to the uh is it the 940
I think um and the 880.
Um then for me at my skill level winging
no problem at all. They're amazing. um
power winging. I'm I'm now using I'm
pretty sure it is the 940. Um and uh
yeah, it's it's just incredible in terms
of performance. Um but four drive
surfing, prone surfing or um
downwinding,
then I'm usually on either
the 1000, the 1070, or the 1160. Now
again, my weight, my skill level, the
conditions that I'm usually foiling and
downwinding in, um, that's why I'm
focused on those three foils. But they
are, all three of those have got a real
special place for me in my foiling
quiver. Um, because they are so good.
Um, I will surf with them. I will
downwind with them. um I can pump them
all really, you know, better than I
thought I'd be able to for fors of their
size. Um but like I said, the 1350 um
for people who want to have a light wind
wing or for sub paddle ups or for
downwinding any sort of discipline of
downwinding um light wind, light small
conditions. Um the 1350 has got amazing
glide. It's it's pretty damn fast. um
aspect ratio of 13.93.
Um yeah,
the bigger sizes. I'll do a review about
them later when I'm allowed to. At the
moment,
bit hush hush still. Okay, so now it's
time for the Arts and the Art V2s. Where
are the Arts? Well, I've lent them to
somebody. Um I had the range from the
1099 to the 799. and never owned the uh
the smallest uh below the 799. Um in
fact, I gave the 799 to a friend and
haven't seen it since. So, obviously,
somebody's still enjoying it. The reason
that I haven't got any isn't because
they're bad foils. The 899 was one of my
favorites for a long time. The triple 9
was the first foil that I could actually
uh prone pump and link waves. And then
the 1099 when I got that again amazing
in terms of pumping and linking um for
lighter conditions, smaller conditions.
Um
they were epic in their time. They were
absolutely, you know, just a game
changer for for me and a lot of people.
Um and they're still a really good high
aspect foil for first time uh for for a
first high aspect foil. Um but again
progression through different designs um
have revealed I suppose you could say a
few flaws in them. Um they don't
tolerate wing tip breaches very well. Um
and uh they do have the bigger sizes uh
9 and 1099 do have quite aggressive
lift. Um so for prone foiling that can
catch you out sometimes. Um,
but you know, if you can find them, if
you can buy them, I don't know, maybe
secondhand, they are still really really
good foils. And, uh, yeah, there's
there's a lot to be said for them. Um,
the reason I don't have them anymore
isn't because I don't like them. It's
because there's so many other foils and
I just I can't use them all all the
time. Um, the Art V2s, however, I did
want to um uh to point a few things out.
Uh very very different. This is the
1099. Very different. Um if you remember
the art, the original arts got very um
almost cut off wing tips. Um so classic
sort of high aspect foil just very
little difference in in uh in the cord
all the way along to the wing tip and
then a cut off wing tip. But uh the RV2s
very different um in their design. Um
these are faster. Um, I think they're
every bit as good to pump. Um, they turn
better. They tolerate wing tip breaches
better. They don't feel
surfy. It's weird to say. They they
perform great in the surf, but they
don't feel
surfy compared to some other foils. Um,
so these ones
for me, I still use these a lot. This is
the 1099, the biggest one in the range.
And this is the 879.
I'm not sure if it's the smallest in the
range, but it's certainly the smallest
one that I've got. Um the uh the 7 sorry
the 979 and the 879
um are my favorite foils here in the
Netherlands when the North Sea gets
ridiculously messy and we've got about
eight sand bars and there's currents
depending on the tide incoming outgoing
um depending on all sorts of things the
state of tide the currents all sorts of
things um it can can be very very
challenging. Um, you need a foil that
can handle speed because it does ramp up
very big very quick. Then it disappears.
Then it ramps up very big very quick and
and it just because of all the sand
bars. It just does that messy as hell,
inconsistent as hell, but fun as hell
when you're on the right foil. And these
do the trick. They really do. Um, I did
an Instagram post when I um was using I
think it was this the 979
um
in exactly the conditions I'm talking
about and I put is it AC/DC um Thunder
Struck music to it. So, if you want to
see it in action, have a look at my
Instagram um Dominic Hoskins. And yeah,
I think it comes across just how fast
these things can go, how easy they are
to control in the messiest of
conditions. Honestly, I still love these
fossils and they are my first choice in
conditions like that because they just
cut through everything without wobble,
without anything. Um and yeah, seriously
high performance. Um,
but in proper surf,
um,
I would say that they don't feel as
surfy as, um, as the Spitfires and a new
range, which I'm not allowed to talk
about at the moment at all, but again,
I'll do a separate video on that later.
Um, I'm trying to get across why they're
not surfy. They they sort of they turn a
little bit like a high aspect foil.
Maybe not. I think it's like a cross
between a high aspect and a surf foil.
That's how they turn. Um, they they roll
real quick. Um, but it's not that sort
of smooth, you know, everything's done
at a pace with the RV2s. That's why I
love them so much. Um, obviously when
you get up to the 1099, then, you know,
everything's slow as you get bigger and
bigger and bigger in foils. Um, but it's
still in the right conditions. The 1099
is an amazing performance foil. Um,
winging, surfing,
downwinding.
Yeah, they're they're sort of like that
halfway house. They're faster than most
surfs, but they're not as fast as a high
aspect. So, they can deal with most
conditions. Um, in fact, if you asked me
for one foil out of the whole Axis range
that was sort of like the Swiss Army
knife and it could do well in
everything, it would be the Art V2s. Um,
even though the Fireballs have got such
I think Fireballs got a big bit better
range for each size, but the RV2 isn't
that far off. And um, in terms of
pumping, they do really well. Not.
Again, I think the fireballs probably
beat uh beat the RB2s in terms of how
easy they are to pump. Um because
they've got better glide and they're
slightly faster, then they're easier to
keep pumping. Um I think the Arts are
very good at pumping in their range, but
if you drop out of their speed range,
they they can stall on you um not super
suddenly, but more suddenly than the
Fireballs. Um, but that's almost like an
unfair comparison because the fireballs
are so ridiculously easy to pump and
they give you so much notice of uh of
when they're going to stall. They It's
almost like they don't want to stall on
you. Um, so anyway, that's the RV2s. Got
a lot of time for these bad boys. Um,
still a big favorite of mine.
Spitfires. Why am I holding up the case
or the bag rather than the foil? Because
for me, this is the moment, quite an
iconic moment in in my opinion, where
Axis changed from their gray
uh I suppose they really changed from
the gray covers for their foils over to
black with red zips for the Arts and Art
Pros, but really the Spitfire for me
marked a change when they came up with a
different color for every new range. And
not only do the Spitfire foils hold a
special place for me for reasons that
I'll explain in a minute, um, but so do
the bags. I look at every time I see one
of these Spitfire bags, I smile. Um, it
makes me really happy. Um, yeah, I've
spent a lot of time on the Spitfires
from the 1180 all the way down to the
780. That's the smallest one I own. They
do, I think, at least two sizes smaller
than that. Um, but the reason I've got
the um 840 and the 960 here and none of
the other sizes is because they are
constantly being loaned out to people um
for all sorts of reasons. Whether it's
demoing, whether it's they they just
want to try them for to see if they're
ready for progression or they just want
to try a good surf foil for the first
time. Maybe they're a beginner, they've
been on the big slow foils, and now they
want to try a surf foil to see uh how
much of a difference it makes and if
they're ready for it. And for me, I was
either surfing with the PGs, the
original PGs, I say mostly the 910 and
the uh the 1010, um or the Artle
9 and 1099.
Um, I never managed to prone foil with
the 899. It was just too small for me
and I I I just couldn't do it. Um,
again, I just want to say that the
conditions I was foiling in at the time
in Aman were very very small, weak,
inconsistent stuff. So, um, I'm going to
use that as an excuse. But anyway, um
the point is that when the Spitfires
came out, uh I was lucky enough at the
time Adrian sent me a pre-production
Spitfire 900. It blew my mind. It felt
it just felt perfect for the the the
good surf days in the M, but it also
coped with the the mediocre crap that
that we got quite a lot. And um it was
faster than the PGs, not as fast as the
arts, but it turned so nicely and it
pumped pretty damn well. Um got to stay
high on the mast and um you've got to be
quite refined with your pump. I think
the arts are much more forgiving. Um the
PGs are certainly easier to pump, but
they are slow and uh you know that's
that's why that's a tradeoff. But the
Spitfires, I could pump the 900
reasonably well. The 960 I could pump to
link quite a lot of ways, more than my
legs and and aerobic fitness would would
cope with. Um, and of course, if you get
bigger than that in in 1030, 1100, and
1180,
um, they just get easier and easier and
easier to pump. But even the big ones,
this is the thing about the Spitfire
Orange, even the big ones felt nice to
turn. And yes, slower to turn as you get
bigger obviously, but they still had
that lovely surfy feel. Um, and the 1180
had a huge range. In fact, I had from,00
1100 down to
840 first and then later on I bought the
1180 and the 780. Um, and once I got the
1180, I don't think I ever used the 1100
again because the range of the 1180 And
the 1030 was so good um that if it was
big enough, if the waves, if the surf
was big enough for me to go, hang on,
the 1180 it's too big or I can use a
smaller foil. Then I'd jump down to the
1030. I didn't need that 1100 in the
middle. Um but yeah, 960 it that's when
um sorry the 1030 and the 960 sort of
took over from the PNG 1010 and um 910.
But that 900 was such a special foil
because
um I could just surf
the waves at the time faster, turn
harder. Um, it just everything was just
better. It really was. So, this range
holds a real special place in my heart,
in my foiling quiver. Um, I'll never get
rid of them. I lend them out a lot, but
I'll never get rid of them. Um, here in
the Netherlands, when we get our weak,
crappy, mushy waves, they're perfect for
that. Not so much the absolutely chaotic
crap that the North Sea can can throw at
me where I told you that they are V2s.
that's where they excel. That's where my
choice. But for the, you know, the
slower um sort of waves,
um I love them. Absolutely love the
Spitfires. And uh yeah, for the demo
fleet for full drive, when I go out and
do the events, the Spitfires are so user
friendly, but still capable of, you
know, unless you're a pro pushing the
limits, then I can imagine they'd
probably hold you back. Um, but for for
nearly everybody, the Spitfires, I
think, um, in the right conditions,
amazing foils. Now, this is not only the
last range of foils in this video, but
this is where we go to another level.
So, here it is. This is the Tempo. This
one is the 1020 with the Skinny 30 rear
and obviously the titanium fuselage. Um,
the whole thing is
almost futuristic. The build quality and
the performance is off the charts. It's
incredible. Like I said, when I first
saw it, I thought that's beyond my
capabilities. I'm so glad Adrian almost
forced me to try it because I was
absolutely blown away by how easy it was
to use. Now, right, it's not a beginner
foil. It's definitely not a beginner
foil. You've got to have a reasonable
level of of skill um to be able to cope
with it. Um but it's a lot easier than I
thought. And I think
I'm pretty confident that
this will be accessible to a lot more
people, way more people than just the
elite. It's it's not confined to the
elite. I mean, it's it's designed for
the elite for sub foil downwinding. Um,
but it's so much more than just that.
Um, I think for winging, it'll be
amazing. I mean, I don't do much winging
anymore because I'm much preferring
power winging, but I am going to bust
out the wings again simply so I can use
this foil setup with wind wings and just
be able to report back to say how it
felt, how it performed. Um, I can tell
you that for downwinding, uh, for me
with full drive, uh, downwinding, these
are amazing. Um, and for power winging,
these are again, these are amazing. Um,
so I, this is why I'm so confident that
for winging, they will be really, really
good as well. Um, I haven't used them in
the surf yet, but I know people who have
and they like them. For me, my first
impressions are that they're not a surf
foil. They'll you'll be able to use them
in the surf, especially if you're a
really good level. But,
um, right, let's start with the
performance characteristics.
The speed and glide is off the off the
charts, off the scale, whatever you
like. Um, but it doesn't feel like raw
crazy dangerous speed. It feels like,
you know, you're confident at speed
because it's so stable, because it's so
efficient and glidy. You you feel like
you can go faster, faster, faster, and
you know, you don't feel like you're
losing control. Um,
turning. They are as loose as hell. Um,
and this is why I'm saying that I don't
think they're going to be any good for
beginners. Um,
but as long as you've got a reasonable
level of control of a foil that's got,
you know, that's loose on its roll axis,
then you'll be absolutely fine. Um,
don't get me wrong, they don't feel
skittish. They don't feel like you're
out of control or or or dangerous in any
way whatsoever. It's just what I noticed
was that any amount of toe or heel
pressure or or you know, how whatever
you so many different ways to initiate a
carve. Um but they will keep rolling
until you stop them. Whereas a lot of
the surf oil foils, they'll start
carving and you push down on them and
you you carry on pushing with that same
pressure to, you know, complete the
carve. And then obviously you're you
know, pivoting and twisting and changing
the angle of roll and your and
everything else. Um, but with these, if
you keep pushing, they'll they'll keep
rolling. So, you've just got to, you
know, grip with your toes, with your
ankles, with your calves, um, with your,
you know, your knees, thighs, everything
that you use to control roll and and
turning. Um, you've you've got to be on
it. it. I will reiterate, it's not that
they get out of control.
Um, when I first started playing around
with them, that roll axis sort of took
me by surprise a little bit. Uh, I think
it was the similar feeling that I got
when I used the Tacuma 980 for the first
time, coming off big slow foils, and
suddenly I was on the Tacuma 8 980. It
was like, whoa. After 10 minutes, I was
like, okay. And after 20 minutes, I was
like, this is amazing. I can control it.
doesn't take long to get used to and
once you can control it, it's it's
really not a problem.
It's funny.
So, what I am going to do right now,
I've just noticed that uh this little
edge here where you put your bolts in,
that's supposed to go there. And with a
screwdriver, a crosshair, a Phillips
head, you then tighten that up. And
yeah, that's nicely locked in position.
And now it's smooth as hell. There's no
drag from the bolt holes uh or from the
uh the heads of the bolts. Really nice
touch. Um but it is sharp. And the uh
you know, it's machined
out of titanium. Sharp. Be careful. Um,
so
gliding speed, I've not found a top end
yet. I just feel like it can go faster
and faster and faster, um, and retain
control. Um,
I am convinced
that these are going to be one of my
favorite foils. And again, um, every
foil has got its own specific design
characteristics and they will suit
specific conditions and different styles
of riding from whoever's using them. Um,
so yeah, I think
I think these are going to be difficult
to beat in terms of what they do.
How do they stack up against the other
foils, especially the fireballs? Well,
the fireballs are definitely easier to
use. Um, they're not quite so high
performance.
If you are capable of a higher level of
performance, then I think these pump I
mean pumping on flat water. I've not
actually done any flat water foiling
with these yet. So, just getting up on
foil full drive and then just pumping
around on flats. I haven't done that
yet. I've done that a lot with the
fireballs. Super easy. Um, these ones,
they do need more speed to keep going.
Once you've got that speed and glide
going, they're just so efficient. Um,
make it easier to pump. So, I can't say
that one or the other is easier to pump
because pumping in different conditions
is very different. Pumping
keeping pumping to keep you going when
you're downwinding, these will win. um
pumping in every other aspect whether
it's linking waves or or um flat walls I
suppose uh then I think the fireballs
will be easier to pump but again people
who are very very very good will
probably be able to do that with these
as well but I think even they would
probably say yeah the fireballs are
easier um so I think that's about all I
have to say about everything that I
wanted to talk about. So if there are
any questions, I will do my very best to
answer. Um,
but in the meantime, please bear in mind
that this is how I have found all these
foils. Um, those are the characteristics
that I have sort of gleaned through my
use, my skill level, my style of riding,
the conditions that I ride in. And it's
different for everybody. So, I will try
very hard to answer any questions that
you throw at me. But questions like
which is the best foil for me?
I don't know your skill level, your
style of riding, the conditions you ride
in, all the above and more, you know.
Um, so if you've got any questions, try
and be specific um because I don't have
a huge amount of time, but I'll do my
best. All right, thanks guys. Catch you
later.